(upbeat music)
Alright we're gonna build a currency conversion app
I'll show you here what we got here
so you have something like 500 dollars
in Australian Dollar
and you want to know what that is in Swiss Francs
it will convert it.
So this one includes fetching data.
This one includes caching data
because when we hit this API,
we need to provide it our base rate.
If we're starting from Euro, then we want to know
what the conversion rates are.
But if we are starting from Croatian Kuna
and we want to convert it into British Pounds,
then we need to set our base as the HRK
and then find how to convert it to that.
So we're learning about how to cache with that.
So we are using this API, called the exchangeratesapi.io.
It is totally free.
There was another one like this that went paid
and the nice thing about this
it that they are just scraping the data
from the European Central Bank.
So when that one went paid I just swapped out all of,
I used this API on my own website,
I just swapped it out with the new API.
And there's lots of different websites
that provide like something this
and they even provide the source to the code on Github
if you'd like to host it yourself.
Because if you're using this for actual checkout processes,
you probably want to make sure that the data coming in
is yours and not somebody who's gonna change on you.
So let's get going with this.
Real quick we've got a form here
with the input with the from amount.
Then we have a select box that is the from currency.
You'll notice that there is no option for the from
or the to currency because that is going to be populated
on page load.
And then we finally have a to amount.
If you open up money.js,
you'll see I've already given you just a list of currencies
and this is just the currency code translated to,
I don't know what you call this,
the English version of what that currency code stands for
and we're going to be using these currencies
to go ahead and populate the drop downs in here.
Cause right now if you click on these drop downs there's
nothing in there.
So let's start with the converting these currencies here
into drop downs so we can populate those.
So let's go and make a function here
called generateOptions that takes in some options,
and that's going to take in an options object
so we need to pass in the currencies.
And when the page loads we'll say const optionsHTML
is equal to generate options,
and we'll pass it the currencies object that we have here.
And I'll just go ahead
and console log the optionsHTML on page load.
Cause we want that to load as fast as possible.
Soon as the page loads, generate those options that we have.
So let's just console log in here the options
and open that up in our browser.
We don't need any tooling for this one.
Let's see if we've got an object here
with everything that we want.
All right so let's go back to looping.
How do you loop over an object, right?
Well there's the for of loop you could use.
Yeah but we could also use the object.entries
or object.values or object.keys.
We'll use objects.entries to turn this object into an array.
So we'll go into here and we'll say const optionsHTML
is equal to, actually we can just go ahead
and return this directly, we don't need a variable.
Return object.entries, we'll pass it, whoa.
Pass it our options.
And let's just see what that gives us so far.
Okay, that gives us array and each item in the array
is another array.
The first thing being the currency code
and the second thing being the, let's call it a label.
The label for that code.
Okay, so we can take that array and map over it.
And we're gonna get a subarray.
And we'll just console log that
and see what we're dealing with.
So for each one we're console logging the subarray.
You might know by now that we can destructure that into,
we'll call that the currency code and the currency name.
And then let's just console log currency code
and currency name.
Okay there we go.
It's looking good.
You see these are undefined
cause we're not actually returning anything
from this map right now
So that's what we need to do now,
is we will return some backticks
and that will have an option tag.
The value is going to be the currency code.
And the name in here will be the currency name.
Let's double check the one that I built here.
Looks like I do the code and the name,
so if we wanted to put the code and the name,
we could just take the code,
put it in front and use a dash.
Okay so we'll refresh that.
You see that our array now optionsHTML
is just a whole bunch of options
and then finally at the end of this map,
we can do a .join on nothing,
that should just turn it into a dump of HTML.
Yeah that looks good.
Now on page load we can populate the options elements
so we should go to the top of our files and select those.
So const fromSelect is equal to document.querySelector
and we'll grab the input
where the name is equal to from currency.
And then the toSelect will be the to currency,
and then we'll go down to the bottom here
and say the fromSelect dot
innerHTML is equal to the optionsHTML
and then the toSelect we'll get the exact same.
And that's why I've stored it in a variable here.
Cause if I were to do this,
then I'd be running that function twice
which is unnecessary.
So just run it once, store it in a variable
and then pop it in.
Now when I refresh, look at that!
Boop!
Each one immediately has the dropdown
of everything that we need.
Okay that's looking good.
All right, next let's work on some data for a bit.
I don't like going too far into the UI
without coding up the actual functionality.
Because I find if I start with UI
and then go into functionality,
I find that I tie my functionality too tightly
to the actual UI.
So let's code the function that gonna go off
and fetch the data from the exchange rates API.
So we'll make a function here called fetch rates
and that is going to take a base
and we'll default it to USD.
I'm not American or anything but,
let's just default it to USD.
Make that an async function
and then we will go ahead and fetch the rates.
So the response is the fetch
and we need to fetch from the endpoint
which is API.exchangeratesapi.io/latest.
Let's stick that in a variable at the top of our file here.
So say const Endpoint is equal to that.
Then we'll go back to our fetch rates function
and we'll fetch the endpoint.
Now the way that the endpoint works
is that you put a question mark on the end
and you set the base is equal to USD
and that's going to see the base is there.
If I were to change that to CAD,
now the base would be in Canadian.
So we want to fetch the endpoint,
but we want to tack on the base value
that has been passed in.
So wrap that sucker in some backticks,
then interpolate it with you dollar curly,
and then we will put the query param on the end
and we'll say the base is equal to
and then we'll interpolate the base variable
that was passed in to this fetch rates function.
Okay, and now we know that we can say
rates is equal to await response.json
and then let's just go ahead console log rates.
Now I should be able to run that myself
from the terminal here.
So we'll say fetch rates and we'll just do the base of USD.
Res.json is not a function!
Okay.
Oh what did I forget?
Take a look, I forgot the await right there.
Let's run it now.
There we go.
So we immediately get a promise back,
cause this is an async function which returns a promise.
And then in there you get our rates, that based on it.
Now if I pass CAD to it, does that work?
There we go.
Yep.
Base of CAD and we get all of our rates in here.
So this function has done enough.
We'll simply just return the rates from that
and we'll call that a day.
Now the next thing that I want to do
is to make a convert function
and this convert function is gonna take in an amount
that we want to convert, a raw number.
And then we also want to take in the from currency
as well as the to currency.
Now if we don't have the rates for that specific currency,
we're gonna have to use this fetch rates function
to go ahead and do it.
So we'll make a convert function,
that takes in an amount if from and a to.
And now here's where it gets a little bit tricky.
We could fetch the rates each time,
but that could be a little bit slow.
Especially, if we look at the example that I have here,
every time I type in,
I'm calling the convert function.
And you see how nice and fast that is?
What would happen if I had to fetch
the rates every single time someone typed into this box?
For this number alone, I'd be fetching the rates five times.
And that's unnecessary
and often API's will rate limit you.
They say okay, "You can only have sixty requests per hour."
So what you need to do in that case,
is you need to cache the rates.
Meaning you need to hold on to them
if you already have them.
And there's different techniques you can do.
You can delete rates after a couple of minutes,
something like that.
So what we're gonna do,
is we're gonna make an object up here.
Let's do it right below the endpoint.
And we will make the object called ratesByBase
and we'll set that to an empty object.
And this is going to store all of the rates in it.
So we'll go back to our convert function here.
And we will
first check if we even have the rates to convert
from that currency.
So the way it's gonna work is that,
it's gonna be something like this,
it's gonna say CAD is equal to an object
and CAD will be one, HKD will be five point 8,
whatever, you get the point.
And then as soon as somebody changes their from,
which is this one,
to maybe Australian dollars, we'll do AUD
and we'll have another one.
So eventually if you cycle through all of these,
we'll have a massive rates by base object
that will contain all of the rates by their from value.
So by default we start with nothing
cause we don't have any of those.
And we'll go into our convert.
We'll say if, there is no rates by base,
square bracket from, so this would be,
if there's no CAD property,
then we need to go ahead and fetch it.
But we don't know it's always gonna be CAD,
so we are going to use square brackets to look up
what they've passed in from the from function.
So if there's no rates from, then console log, oh no,
we don't have, let's turn this to backticks actually.
From to convert to, to.
So let's go get it!
So I think I should be able to just run this now
if I run convert
and I wanna convert $100 from Canadian to USD.
It says, "Oh no, we don't have CAD to convert to USD.
"Let's go get it."
Okay, it makes sense.
So we're gonna have to use our fetch rates function here.
So first thing you wanna do here is mark this as async.
And, inside of here we'll say
const rates
is equal to, what was the function called?
FetchRates.
And we wanna fetch the rates from the base
of what they are requesting,
which is our from variable.
And then when that comes back we will,
oh we forgot to await that.
And we'll console log the rates
just to see that we have them
and then we'll go ahead and store them for next time.
And then that's what we'll is we'll say
ratesByBase, square bracket from is equal to
the rates that just came back.
So let me show you how that works.
If we take our ratesByBase,
you see there's nothing in there.
And if we run convert,
it says, "Oh no, we don't have CAD, going to convert it."
Then it comes back with the rates
and now our ratesByBase has those values in it.
And if I were to rerun rates convert,
you'll notice that it doesn't say that, "Oh no" anymore,
because we know have those values.
Soon as you refresh the page, they're gone.
You could, of course used local storage
to hold on to those
but I feel like just the page load is good enough
for the amount of time that we need to do
and there really isn't any API limit
on this API that we're using.
So that's what we wanna do and then next what we need to do
is convert the amount that they passed in.
So, const convertedAmount is equal to,
we'll take the rate that they're converting,
so ratesByBase from dot rates square bracket to,
what?! (laughing)
So let me show you what's going on here.
If we take our ratesByBase
and we go to CAD, that is going to be the from
and then inside of that we also need to grab the rates.
And then we need to find out
what is the rate that they're converting to.
So let's say they're converting to USD,
so we would look that up with dot USD.
And that will give us 0.7517, okay?
So that's why, instead of using hard-coding CAD and USD,
we're using variables from and to
and you have to use square bracket notation, in that case.
So that will simply just get the rate,
maybe we just we'll name that rate.
Because let's not do too much in one go.
And then we'll make it, our convertedAmount variable again.
And we'll take the rate and we'll multiply it
by the amount they passed in, and let's just console log,
just for our own sanity,
amount
from is
convertedAmount
in to.
And finally return convertedAmount.
So let's see if this works just in the terminal here.
If I run my convert 100 CAD to USD it should say,
"Oh, don't have CAD rates, let me go get them."
When that is back it should go ahead
and pull them up for us and return the converted amount.
Here we go, oh no!
We don't have CAD.
Convert it, good.
And then a couple seconds later it goes ahead
and brings the rates back
and then converts that amount for us.
Good, good, good.
Last thing is this convert function doesn't return,
it returned a promise to us
and I guess if we typed await in front of that,
yeah, it actually gives us the value that we're looking for.
$75.
Let's try it the other way around.
So 100 USD to CAD.
Clear this out, run it.
Dollar is high right now! (laughs)
Alright good.
So that convert function is working.
You see what I mean about making these functions?
Just let 'em run nice and cleanly
and now that, I think we've built
the main functionality of this app,
let's go ahead and start hooking it up to our UI here.
So what are the different things that we need to listen to?
We need to listen for, when someone types in here,
we need to listen when someone changes something in here,
and when we need to listen for
when someone changes something in here.
So three inputs.
Now let me show you a little trick, what we can do,
is we can actually listen for an input event on the form.
And that will cover all of them.
Which is really cool.
So we'll go up here and select the form.
When const form is equal to document querySelector
and what do we have on that form here?
It's app space form, so .app space form.
And we'll go down here and say form.addEventListener.
We'll listen for input,
and when that happens we'll run a handle input function.
So let's go up here and define that function.
E.
And let's just go ahead and console e.target
and e.currentTarget just to show you that one
for the 100th time in this course.
Watch this now.
As soon as I type in here,
you see that the e.target is changing every single time
and the e.currentTarget is always gonna be the form.
Why?
Because we're listening for the event on the form,
which is our current target
but the actual event happens on input or select box
and those events bubble up to the form,
where we handle them in our handleInput.
So that's one little trick there,
is you can listen for input on a form
and that will cover all of your inputs
that are inside of that form.
Now when that happens,
we just need to start wiring up all of our functions now.
So, we'll say const rawAmount
is equal to.
We're gonna await and then we're gonna convert.
And the convert will take three arguments,
takes the amount, the from and the to.
And that's pretty easy to do because we can just take
the from input and we'll take the value out of that.
We'll take the fromSelect, we'll take the value out of that.
And we'll grab the toSelect and take the value out of that.
This is not an async function so make sure you mark that.
And looks like it's giving me raw,
from input is not defined,
oh I called it fromSelect,
that makes more sense than fromInput so we'll say fromSelect
looks like it's giving me grief,
that fromInput is not a thing
and yeah looks like I didn't select this input yet.
So duplicate that and we'll rename one to fromInput
and that is the input with the from amount.
Let's go back to our handler, looks good.
Let's console log rawAmount.
So now if I put 500, you see that first time?
It's US to US by default and when I type that in,
it says, "Oh no, we don't have US."
Goes and fetches it, and then runs it.
Five US is five US then 50 US is 50 US and 500 US is 500 US.
Good!
So we can just go ahead and select this sucker right here,
the to amount
do we have that yet?
Nope.
So we'll say, toEl is equal to
a paragraph of the class of to_amount.
By the way, why did I switch
to using underscores in this example?
(laughing) I don't know!
I don't know.
Don't email me, (laughing) I don't know why.
But the important thing is that I was consistent
and I didn't use camel case anywhere in my HTML.
So that's totally fine.
So we have this toEl
and we'll go back down to handleInput
and we'll say toEl.textContent
is equal to the rawAmount.
So let's try it.
Canadian dollars to US.
100 Canadian dollars equal to 75.17503 blah blah blah blah.
All right.
So it's working.
And if I switch these
it's working just fine.
The only problem is that it's not formatting it
and it's also not formatting it accordingly
to what the locale is.
So money in New Zealand dollars
or money in Indian rupee may be formatted
a little bit different
than just a dollar sign in front of it
and some of them have cents and some of them don't.
So we can use this really cool API that's called,
Number Format and it actually knows
how to handle currency formatting,
which is really, really cool.
So we can go here and say const formattedAmount.
Actually.
So let's actually make another function above this
and we'll just make it a function called formatCurrency.
And that will take in an amount
and a currency to format it on
and then inside of there
we will just return
and we'll make a Intl.NumberFormat
and you pass it the language of the reader
so you can either pass it en-US or you can leave it blank
and it will detect the language of the browser.
Which is almost always what you want.
So we'll leave that blank there
and then you pass it an options argument here.
We'll say style is equal to currency
and the currency that you want to format
is going to be the currency that got passed in here
and then we can simply just pass currency.
And then finally you call this format function
so this part here, this is called a formatter
and then the method is just a format function
on the formatter and then you pass it your amount.
So I believe now, instead of just saying rawAmount,
we can say formatCurrency,
pass the amount,
pass the to value,
and that is the toSelect.value.
Let's see if that works.
So, 500.
Not working.
Let's see if there's anything going in, in the console here.
So it's not working for me.
Let's break this down a little bit further.
If I run into a problem like this
and there's many things calling each other,
I'm just going to work on one by one.
So here I'm just gonna say formatCurrency.
Gonna pass it $100 and I'm gonna pass it USD.
It gives me back 100.
I wonder if this one does need.
Most of these Intl methods will detect it,
but if I pass en-US, will that fix it?
Yeah, there we go.
Okay so, that's a bit of an unfortunate thing
about this API here,
is that it will require you to pass it a locale.
So there's ways to detect that from the user,
it's a little bit outside of this tutorial.
So in our case, just put the locale
of what you will reading it in.
And then if I pass it 500
USD.
Swiss Francs.
Ooh!
PHP.
Favorite language.
Looks like it is formatting it just right.
Which is good.
One kinda other interesting thing
is you could also use this to format this part as well.
Based on the input which would be kinda interesting.
Maybe that's a little bit of a exercise
you could have there.
But just taking a look at it,
I think everything is working really smoothly.
We covered a lot of things there,
including caching it, not even a lot of code.
Especially if you take this out and put it in a module.
And we're gonna learn about that in a couple videos as well.
Hopefully you enjoyed that one, see you in the next one.